Rideshare company Uber introduced its digital app-based transportation service in the Charlottesville area and 23 other markets Thursday.

Here’s how it works: Using a smartphone app, customers can see nearby Uber cars and book rides on the fly. The app displays the type of vehicle and shows the driver’s picture, and riders can make payments electronically.

“Before we launched in Charlottesville, we saw a lot of demand for Uber in the area, and we’re really excited to finally meet that demand and provide a safe and convenient new way to get around,” Uber spokesman Taylor Bennett said in an email.

Uber and rideshare rival Lyft recently triumphed in a two months-long dustup with the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. The agency in June ordered both to stop operating in Virginia, charging they’d failed to obtain proper authority. The two sides reached a deal several weeks ago with Gov. Terry McAuliffe proclaiming that the state “welcome[s] innovative companies.”

To celebrate the launch in Charlottesville, Uber is offering five free rides to new and existing users through Sept. 1. Fares around town will range from about $23 for a trip from Charlottesville Albemarle Airport to the Corner to $6 for a trip from Wertland Street to Barracks Road Shopping Center.

Riders can get fare quotes before requesting rides, split fares within the app and share estimated times of arrival through the app.

Drivers must be 21 or older, undergo background checks and have a midsize or full-size four-door vehicle “in excellent condition,” according to Uber’s website. Bennett declined to say how many Uber drivers are serving the Charlottesville area.

With Thursday’s market expansion, Uber said it will serve 55 percent of the U.S. population. Uber operates in 205 cities in 45 countries, according to the company’s website.

News of the company’s entry into the Charlottesville area elicited a mixed response.

“From Zip Cars to UberX, people in more urban areas are benefiting from private sector solutions that provide real alternatives to owning a personal vehicle,” Jane Dittmar, chairwoman of the Albemarle County Board of Supervisors, said in an email.

“In the future, this will mean cleaner air and the need for fewer parking spaces,” Dittmar said. “And as more people forgo car ownership, local governments with urban and suburban areas will need to be responsive to increased citizen demand for sidewalks, bike lanes and mass transit options.”

City Councilor Kristin Szakos said Uber “has been on the radar” and “we have had some conversations recently about Uber and Airbnb, and how they set up a competitive market in an area using less regulated forms of hospitality or transportation,”

Airbnb is an online service that allows people to rent out rooms or their entire homes.

“As we look at these new [business] models, we have to have new responses,” Szakos said.

Part of the response, Szakos said, might be to encourage people to get involved with these types of services as a way to build viable small businesses that don’t require large investments of money, time or resources.

For now, Szakos said, when it comes to Uber, “I’m not sure I have a strong opinion one way or the other yet. As we look at how other communities have addressed all of these issues, we have a lot to learn from places that have already been there.”

Local entrepreneur Mark Brown, who owns Yellow Cab of Charlottesville and purchased the Charlottesville Parking Center earlier this year, expressed skepticism about Uber’s business model.

“Their product to me appears to be very similar to smartphone-based hitchhiking,” Brown said in a statement. “The significant technology investments made by Yellow Cab in the form of the ‘Curb’ (formerly ‘Taxi Magic’) services ensure accountability from our drivers while helping to create a safe experience for our passengers.

“As a passenger with Uber, you simply have to take your chances when it comes to safety and security. It remains to be seen how that product will be received by our community.”

After two children and three moves, Trish Nardone was burnt out. When she learned her son Jason needed specialized schooling after a diagnosis of attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, she wasn’t ready to go back to work to pay for it. But with her Charlottesville home equipped with a walkout basement, she sensed an opportunity.

She started on Airbnb slowly, renting out the basement just a few days in the first year. Now, the Nardone family has paying guests, some from far-off places like France and Shanghai, almost every weekend.

"We were able to pay for school and stay in the black," said Nardone, 42, who came to Richmond this week to encourage the Virginia General Assembly to legitimize the fast-growing short-term lodging industry. "I couldn't do it without this."

Airbnb, the online platform founded in 2008 that allows property owners to rent out rooms, apartments and houses to travelers seeking short-term stays, is moving closer to becoming legal and regulated throughout Virginia. The House of Delegates passed Airbnb legislation last week on a 75-22 vote. A similar bill is awaiting a committee hearing Thursday in the Senate.

Despite Airbnb’s murky legal status, it's clear that the service has already taken off. In 2015, there were 133,000 Airbnb stays in Virginia, according to the company, an increase of 160 percent from the year before.

Like other technology-driven upstarts, Airbnb has seen push back from the hotel industry and some cities out of fears of an uneven playing field and a lack of regulation that could lead to abuse, such as landlords turning properties into unlicensed hotels.

The hospitality industry and some local governments have called on Virginia lawmakers to beef up accountability measures for Airbnb operators in the bills moving through the legislature.

Del. Christopher K. Peace, R-Hanover, said Airbnb is part of the "disruptive economy" that gives consumers more choice and lower costs.

"Ultimately, I don't think we'll ever totally please the hotel industry," said Peace, the patron of the Airbnb bill in the House, House Bill 812. "They see it as competition. Much like the taxi cabs saw Uber as competition."

The bills under consideration would create a statewide legal framework for Airbnb rental operators that would supersede local attempts to ban or regulate Airbnb, while allowing localities to pass limited ordinances to prevent Airbnb rentals from becoming nuisances to surrounding neighborhoods.

Space could only be rented out on Airbnb by the "primary resident" of a property, which would prevent entrepreneurs from amassing a portfolio of Airbnb rentals as a large-scale enterprise.

A cap would be imposed on the number of adults allowed in an Airbnb unit. A formula would limit the number of adults to "twice the number of sleeping rooms plus four." For a two-bedroom unit, eight adults would be allowed.

The legislation would allow Airbnb to collect and pay taxes on behalf of property owners who offer rentals through the service. Operators who rent out their space less than 45 days per year would not be required to get a business license and would not be subject to local licensing fees or licensing taxes.

"Airbnb is working with governments across the country and around the world to collect and remit hotel taxes on behalf of our community and we look forward to adding Virginia to this growing list and sending millions of dollars in new revenue to the state each year," said Airbnb spokesman Christopher Nulty.

The bills could be in line for changes. Some lawmakers have introduced legislation with stronger enforcement mechanisms preferred by the lodging industry. Senate Majority Leader Thomas K. Norment Jr., R-James City, has said the Senate version needs a "redraft."

The Virginia Restaurant, Lodging and Travel Association sent a letter to lawmakers this month saying the bills would allow Airbnb rentals to operate on "the honor system" by not requiring registration with local governments.

"These bills should include a process by which the rules established can be enforced by requiring Airbnb or its homeowners to register with the locality," read the letter, signed with the logos of more than 40 hotel and hospitality interests and business groups. "Only then can accountability in tax collection and enforcement of basic rules by law enforcement be accomplished."

Virginia’s major theme parks — Kings Dominion and Busch Gardens — also signed on to the letter.

"Kings Dominion is actively involved in driving tourism into the Richmond region and has recently expanded its own campground facilities with deluxe cabins," said Kings Dominion spokeswoman Katelyn Sherwood. "We support those who provide established accommodations and welcome consistency across the lodging industry."

The cities of Roanoke and Williamsburg have stated their opposition to the Airbnb bills in letters to state lawmakers.

Roanoke City Manager Christopher P. Morrill said the bills "preempt" an ordinance passed by Roanoke that puts tighter restrictions on Airbnb due to the city's small lots and tightly packed houses.

"Communities vary throughout the commonwealth and each locality is best suited to determine how this business can be operated in a compatible manner within its neighborhoods," Morrill wrote in a Feb. 4 letter.

Williamsburg Mayor Clyde A. Haulman said the bill's tax structure is "unfair" to existing lodging providers, has weak provisions for local enforcement and will increase the pressure of non-resident investment in neighborhoods due to Williamsburg's status as a college community.

"These bills inadequately address the problems incumbent with renting dwellings to visitors on a short term basis," Haulman wrote in a letter dated Jan. 28.

In September, the Charlottesville City Council approved an ordinance regulating the use of residential properties as transient lodging. The ordinance, based on the city’s previous bed-and-breakfast code, requires ‘homestay’ proprietors to obtain a business license and provisional-use permit.

While those who apply to operate a short-term rental in Charlottesville would need to provide proof of permanent residence at the property, Charlottesville attorneys have said residents or businesses that offer short-term rentals of non-owner occupied units would not be prosecuted.

The city of Richmond has not communicated an official stance, according to officials.

“We are certainly interested to see the outcome,” said Tammy D. Hawley, press secretary to Mayor Dwight C. Jones.

The Richmond City Council recently explored the ramifications of local Airbnb regulation, but the service is still technically illegal in city limits.

Eric Terry, president of the state lodging association, said that hasn't stopped Airbnb from growing in Richmond, which demonstrates the need for stronger local rules.

"Interestingly, there are over 300 listings in the city tonight," Terry said. "Certainly the voluntary compliance is not working."

Peace said having the state collect the taxes that will then be passed back to localities will save local governments money by reducing their workload. He noted that the bill also would create a work group to study the issue of non-resident Airbnb operations for legislative action next year.

As for potential problems with neighbors, Peace said the system will be "complaint-driven."

"Somebody's going to call," Peace said. "There's always going to be some way to enforce the public safety component."

Nardone said she's had no problems so far.

On top of the extra money, she said, renting the basement through Airbnb has "opened up" the world for Jason, 8, who helps clean, gives tours and shows guests how to find Netflix on the TV.

"I understand there needs to be regulations," Nardone said. "But this is really between two people. It's between a host and a guest."

Lyft has landed in Charlottesville.

Beginning at noon Thursday, pedestrians in the Charlottesville area will be able to request a ride with the company by using the on-demand ridesharing service’s smartphone application. As part of the launch, new passengers also will be able to use the code “VALOVE” to receive $5 off of their first Lyft ride.

Drivers hired through Lyft will travel as far out as Stanardsville, Crozet, Orange County, Scottsville, Columbia and Louisa County, according to the Charlottesville Lyft website. For a ride in a standard sedan-sized car, the base fare is $2, the cost-per-mile is $1.05 and the cost-per-minute is $0.18. The service also offers larger rides that accommodate up to six people.

In Virginia, Lyft currently serves the cities of Alexandria, Arlington, Hampton, Newport News, Norfolk, Richmond, Tysons Corner and Virginia Beach.

Uber, a major rival, has operated in Charlottesville since August 2014. Those interested in becoming drivers must be at least 21 years old, be properly licensed to drive and undergo a background check. The company or driver must have insurance that covers up to $1 million in accident damage.

RICHMOND — At least 6,800 Virginians used the online marketplace Airbnb to rent rooms in their homes, or their entire house, to visitors last year.

Airbnb, a platform that links people looking for lodging with those willing to offer it for a price, has become a source of income for many property owners, including Jonathan Speight of Henrico County, who has embraced the so-called sharing economy that Airbnb represents.

Not only has Speight become a highly rated “host” on Airbnb, which he uses to rent extra bedrooms in his home to people such as recent transplants to the area, he also earns cash on the weekends by using the ride-hailing app Uber to drive people around town.

“It is the wave of the future — this is how things are going to be happening,” Speight said of platforms such as Airbnb. “I’m glad to be part of it.”

But state lawmakers are poised to approve legislation to give local governments more authority to regulate Airbnb and other rental platforms as these burgeoning businesses have grown locally, nationally and worldwide as a disruptive force in the hospitality and tourism industry.

The Airbnb website shows thousands of Virginia residents offering rooms or houses for rent, even though the legality of doing so may be questionable.

Regulations on property rentals differ between localities, and the rules are enforced sporadically.

State lawmakers have been wrestling with how to bring these services under a regulatory umbrella. Lawmakers considered several bills in last year’s General Assembly to establish a statewide framework for regulating short-term rentals, but the legislation ultimately was put off so the matter could be studied.

This year, a bill with the backing of local government organizations and Virginia’s established hospitality industry has been moving with relative ease through the General Assembly, though some Airbnb users are worried about its potential ramifications.

Senate Bill 1578, sponsored by Sen. Thomas K. Norment, R-James City, would give local governments the option to adopt ordinances requiring people to register if they want to offer their property for short-term rentals. The registries would give local governments information needed to regulate and tax the rentals.

Localities also could impose fees and penalties of up to $500 on people who fail to register, or whose rentals don’t comply with state, federal or local laws.

The legislation also clarifies that people who offer property for short-term rental must obtain a bed-and-breakfast ABC license if they want to serve alcoholic beverages to guests.

The traditional hospitality industry, including major hotel chains, is backing the legislation, arguing that it will help cure a lop-sided regulatory environment that treats established, regulated businesses differently than people using Airbnb and other online platforms.

“This is not about a big industry wanting a smaller industry not to thrive,” said Eric Terry, president of the Virginia Restaurant, Lodging and Travel Association. “It is really about a level playing field. We welcome Airbnb into Virginia and think it is an important part of the tourism mix.”

The requirements proposed under Norment’s bills are long overdue, said Jack North, who for 13 years has operated Mayhurst Inn, an eight-bedroom bed and breakfast in Orange County.

North said there are thousands of people in Virginia using online platforms essentially to operate the same kind of business he has, without jumping through the same regulatory hoops.

“Legal B&Bs have to comply with federal, state and local laws,” including health, safety and ABC laws, North said. “An Airbnb facility, right now, has to comply with nothing.”

“It affects communities, because [local] governments have no idea who is running these businesses in their communities,” he said. “They are not collecting the taxes and not doing inspections to make sure they are safe.”

Some Airbnb hosts, such as Barbara Pemberton, say they are taking steps to comply with local regulations.

Pemberton, a retired teacher, has rented her house in Albemarle County on Airbnb in the past to earn extra income. She said she now has applied for a business license, installed smoke detectors, and is having the county inspect her property for health and safety.

“I am doing my best to follow the law,” she said.

Norment’s bill passed the Senate by a 36-4 vote on Feb. 7. On Thursday, the House of Delegates General Laws Committee endorsed the bill by a 21-0 vote and then referred it to the House Appropriations Committee. Norment serves as co-chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.

An alternative proposal floated by Airbnb has failed to gain traction.

A substitute bill backed by the company was briefly considered by a House subcommittee on Feb. 14, but it was set aside after representatives of local government groups and the hospitality industry, as well as some bed-and-breakfast owners, lined up to speak for Norment’s bill, which “deals basically with local authority and flexibility, and existing law,” said Phil Kellam, commissioner of revenue for Virginia Beach, who spoke in favor of the bill.

He said rental platforms such as Airbnb are “an industry that offers opportunities for property owners, as well as for vacationers and travelers, as an additional option for lodging. However, we believe very strongly it is a local issue, not one that needs administration or assistance from the state.”

Speight and other Richmond-area residents who use Airbnb also attended the meeting to show support for the company.

Airbnb’s proposed substitute would have maintained the provisions in Norment’s bill, while adding other provisions such as a mechanism for Airbnb to collect local and state taxes on behalf of hosts in Virginia and remit those payments to the state.

The Airbnb proposal also would have allowed people to rent property for up to 21 days per year without being subject to occupancy regulations.

Norment called Airbnb’s substitute bill “ill-advised” and said it had not been vetted by all the stakeholders.

“It will never pass,” he told the subcommittee during the meeting.

The details of how localities might be able to treat Airbnb hosts remain a sticking point, leaving some Airbnb users nervous about what the legislation will mean for them.

“I think the biggest concern for a lot of hosts is that being part of a registry will require people to pay a big fee, or there will be additional expenses,” said Amie Oliver, a Richmond resident who has rented part of her home to visitors, including people attending weddings and writers doing historical research.

Oliver said she and her husband, Harry, started renting out part of their house in late 2015, not long after Richmond hosted the UCI Road World Championships cycling event, which brought thousands of visitors to the city from all over the world.

“That was the first time people realized we don’t have the hotels to support everybody, and so there was great interest in Airbnb,” she said.

For now, however, Oliver said she and her husband are offering rentals only of more than 30 days and waiting to see how the legislation ends up before considering short-term rentals.

Oliver said she doesn’t object to having necessary regulations, but she fears they could become cost-prohibitive.

“I think all anybody wants is that their property rights be respected,” she said. “And small businesses should be encouraged to thrive as long as they are accountable and pay their taxes.”

A Charlottesville-based company that’s seen growing success since it launched three years ago is preparing to equip its digital platform with its own Bitcoin-esque currency.

Founded in late 2014, Moonlighting operates as an online marketplace where users can seek out verified freelancers for a variety of services, from tasks as simple as dog walking or as technical as accounting. Originally conceived as a disrupter to LinkedIn, the mobile app now boasts more than 600,000 freelancers using the platform to “promote their skills, find new clients and get discovered,” according to founder Jeff Tennery.

“They can interact with new clients, send them proposals and get paid right from their mobile phone,” Tennery said. “The idea is that it’s a Swiss army knife for people who want to start their own business, entrepreneurs, or anyone just trying to make a little extra cash on the side.”

Sometimes called “Craigslist without the creepiness,” Moonlighting has expanded into a variety of regions and has partnered with three of the largest news media companies in the country to act as a “21st-century classifieds platform” for well-known newspapers and other online marketplaces, Tennery said. Now, they’re looking to throw their hat into the booming, albeit cryptic, arena of cryptocurrency.

In the first quarter of 2018, Moonlighting will launch an initial coin offering for its own token, dubbed Moonbit. The launch will make Moonlighting the first freelance marketplace to incorporate a form of blockchain technology into its platform.

Blockchain technology is a relatively new concept. Conceptualized in 2008 by an anonymous person or group known as Satoshi Nakamoto, the technology was implemented in early 2009 with the inaugural mining of the first 50 bitcoins.

The concept itself is rather complex, but Robert Parham, a professor at the University of Virginia’s McIntire School of Commerce, summarizes cryptocurrency as an “immutable” form of currency that remembers each of its former transactions via the blockchain, which serves as a public ledger of sorts. That currency is maintained in a “trustless, peer-to-peer” way, Parham said, using a decentralized network of thousands of computers. There is no central authority, meaning the network itself manages the transactions and issues cryptocurrency.

The most commonly known form of cryptocurrency is Bitcoin, the pioneering system invented by Satoshi Nakamoto. While it’s been circulating for nearly nine years, Bitcoin has dominated headlines this year as its price skyrocketed from less than $800 per coin in January to more than $14,000 in early December. Its closest rival currency in value and public exposure, Ethereum, sits at a little more than $400 per coin.

While cryptocurrency can be used for transactions, Parham said Bitcoin was designed primarily as a store of value, with the closest substitute being gold.

“In that sense, what do people use gold for? To hedge against inflation — as a store of value that will not decrease in value,” Parham said. “Bitcoin just does that better, assuming you trust it.”

That said, cryptocurrency does have transactional benefits. Payments that use blockchain technology have no interaction with third parties such as the government, banks or other financial intermediaries. As such, purchases are not taxed, and often have very low transaction fees.

Those features are among the chief reasons Moonlighting is seeking to have its own version of cryptocurrency. The app is anticipating expansion into Latin America, the United Kingdom and Canada next year.

“We wanted to get our freelancers to show up in more marketplaces, and by having the token, we can help people internationally, and remove the currency fees and bank fees that typically eat into commissions and into freelancer’s paychecks,” Tennery said.

While Bitcoin has been a phenomenon in valuation and popularity this year, Tennery said the system isn’t set up to support token programs like Moonbit, so the company has instead opted to back Moonbit with Ethereum. Users can purchase Ethereum coins using the currency of their choice, such as U.S. dollars, and then use Ethereum to purchase Moonbit, which can then be used to make purchases on the Moonlighting platform.

According to Parham, there are hundreds of cryptocurrencies and tokens in existence, with new ones popping up every day and plenty of rotten eggs. To ensure everything is done “legitimately and credibly” with Moonbit, Moonlighting is working with Seattle-based advisory group New Alchemy to guide the company toward its token offering and create a token with what is known as a “smart contract,” which Tennery explains is a “fancy word for code that supports the token, so that it’s secure and safe.” The company also has retained the law firm Cooley LLP to assist in the launch.

“Unlike many of the bad actors launching risky initial coin offerings with nothing more than a white paper and a PowerPoint presentation, Moonlighting is a legitimate company with a solid track record,” said Christian A. Hendricks, a former media executive with The McClatchy Co. and a Moonlighting board member. “With a credible and experienced management team in place, Moonlighting has built a game-changing platform that will only get better with blockchain and the issuance of their cryptocurrency.”

Tennery is looking at a February launch, but said that date may change, as the company wants to ensure the token is fully functional before it is rolled out. Moonlighting also will introduce discounts and incentives to encourage use of the platform and Moonbit, which the company intends to be used more for its utility and less as an investment, like Bitcoin.

The proceeds of the initial coin offering will go toward expanding Moonlighting’s user base, Tennery said. Last year, the app had 100,000 users; this year, it’s at more than 600,000. Tennery hopes to push that number to 7 million by the end of 2018. That explosive growth would only serve to drive up Moonbit’s value. Tennery said the opening price point of a Moonbit token is still undetermined, but will be released publicly closer to the launch.

Warner discusses the gig economy in Charlottesville

U.S. Sen. Mark R. Warner, D-Va., met with about 20 small-business owners, independent contractors and gig-economy workers Wednesday morning to discuss what the federal government can do to help these workers.
Workers with Airbnb, Etsy and Moonlighting were at the roundtable, held at the app’s headquarters, as well as other freelancers and small-business owners. According to Warner, up to a third of the American work force is working in this contingent economy, some working a second job, but others working in gig-economy positions.
Many attendees said they choose to work in this fashion for the flexibility and freedom it allows and to do what they are passionate about for a living.

“People say, ‘Well, I don’t need any of this,’ but that’s not fair either because if they end up back on government benefits that still means the taxpayer has to foot the bill,” Warner said. “I hope that we can figure this out, as a former technology entrepreneur myself, in a way that is much more future versus past, rather than Democrat versus Republican.”

Warner thinks there needs to be a middle ground where people in this gig economy and 1099 workers can get access to things like unemployment, workers’ compensation, disability, retirement and easy access to health care, or what he calls a safety net.

“When you have a lot of these enterprises that grow rapidly, that’s much better for an economy than having one single, large employer that things are good in the community until they’re not,” he said.’

Warner has been holding these roundtable discussions throughout the state to hear these workers’ experiences and ideas.

Moonlighting CEO and founder Jeff Tennery invited the senator to speak at their headquarters after sharing Moonlighting’s analytics report with Warner and seeing his interest to learn more about the gig economy. The Moonlighting app allows people to pay for services as well as post their own skills or what their company offers. 

“It’s a good fit for him, I think, in wanting to help people find jobs,” Tennery said. “It’s the number-one issue come election time. I think he’s being really proactive, really progressive.”

Jen Downey, a local children’s book author, organic donut company owner and Airbnb renter, spoke about how both her and her husband didn’t want the 9-5 job life. They both wanted to be involved in raising their children and she said they felt lucky enough to have the support of their family and friends, who “wouldn’t let us fall all the way to the bottom if things went terribly awry, but that’s it.

Some people who don’t even have that, there’s no way you’re going to try this out and they’re forced into a life choice that they don’t really want.”

State Sen. Martin adds new job as Uber driver

Sen. Stephen H. Martin, R-Chesterfield — whose GOP primary defeat in June means he'll leave the part-time 11th District Senate seat he has held since 1994 — has found a new part-time job in the "gig" economy with a lot of traction:
Driving for Uber.

In a phone interview, Martin, who leaves office in January, reluctantly acknowledged he has hit the road to supplement his job as a self-employed insurance broker and benefits consultant. Martin said he is making good money working for Uber and enjoys driving and visiting with passengers, in what one customer said is an older model Nissan Altima.

"With all the free time I have without running for office, I was looking for a way to supplement my income," he told the Richmond Times-Dispatch. "I enjoy people and I thought I'd try it, and I'm enjoying it."

Martin, 59, said he has been driving for Uber about two weeks, and that with his success in "growing my insurance business" and "doing some rainmaking," that the side job would help push his income over six figures, in addition to the state pension he will receive once he leaves office.

"That's not a bad position to be in," he said.

State senators receive an $18,000 a year salary, plus approximately $15,000 annually for office expenses for what is considered a part-time job. Martin's district includes most of Chesterfield, plus Amelia County and Colonial Heights.

For the last several years, Martin, a fiscal and social conservative, was the self-assured chairman of the powerful Senate Education and Health committee. But in June, he suffered a stunning upset loss in a three-way Republican primary to Amanda Chase, a tea party leaning grassroots political consultant. Chase faces Democrat Wayne Powell, a Chesterfield lawyer, in the general election for the seat in the reliably Republican district.

Martin's personal finances became an issue in his primary campaign, when Chase said debts from a failed business venture caused Martin’s Senate wages to be garnished for a period of time. The senator said at the time that the financial difficulty stemmed from his name being left on a lease of a laundromat business that was resold and subsequently fell into financial difficulty and was shut down.

The soon-to-be retired public official said he is "doing great with the loss of the seat," and does not miss the nastiness of campaigning.

"Me and my family have just been viciously savaged," he said, without going into detail. "I just want to be left alone."

Warner: U.S. needs to adapt to changing economy

The economy of the future will be based on short-term “gigs” and contracting work, said Sen. Mark R. Warner, D-Va., at a speech in front of about 300 University of Virginia students Wednesday afternoon.

Warner stopped by UVa’s Nau Hall as part of a series of town halls around Virginia. Warner also spoke at James Madison University on Wednesday, focusing on the changes to the workforce facing students as they leave school.

“The notion of what it means to have a job when you leave the Grounds is going to be fundamentally different,” Warner said. “For most millennials, the question is less ‘Where are you working?’ than ‘What are you working on?’”

This new economy — also known as the “gig economy” or “on-demand economy” — will force policymakers to think of new ways to help ensure American workers are covered when they need unemployment or health benefits.

That might mean, for example, changing some definitions used in labor law.
“The way the law sees it, you’re either an employee or a contractor,” Warner said. “It’s fine until stuff hits the fan — like it always does. Then you’ve got nothing to fall back on.”

Warner — a Democrat who also served as governor of Virginia from 2002 to 2006 — visited a Professor Gerald Warburg’s class, “Public Policy Challenges of the 21st Century.”
“This class is about the future of federal policymaking,” said Warburg, who was a staffer on Capitol Hill around the same time as Warner. “We’re especially fortunate to have one of those policymakers here today.”

Warner also spoke with students about student loan debt, which has grown to more than $1.2 trillion. It has become an important issue in the Democratic presidential primary, as Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders has proposed tuition-free undergraduate education at public institutions.

Warner said he isn’t sure the plan is financially viable and said he wouldn’t want to do anything to grow the national debt.

Sanders has said the proposal could be paid for through a small tax on certain Wall Street transactions, although this claim is disputed by some economists.

Sen. Warner said he agrees with Hillary Clinton’s plan, which would offer grants to states that adopt “no loans” policies to students. He also said he likes President Barack Obama’s idea to make two-year colleges free.

“I think that is a more reasonable first step,” Warner said.

The senator has been highly active in the student debt issue, and he pushed some of his own ideas at Wednesday’s speech.

Among other things, Warner said he wants to extend Pell Grants to high school students who are taking college credit courses. He’s also sponsored a transparency bill requiring institutions to disclose average student debt and other relevant financial information.
Making income-based repayment of student loans the standard and allowing companies to spend tax-free money on worker training are two other proposals Warner said he’s working on.

These things would allow for some progress before the presidential election even takes place.

“They’re not going to totally solve the problem, but they’re going to move the ball,” he said.

Following the speech, second-year student Ryan Myatt said he agreed with Warner’s concerns over Sanders’ college plan.

“It’s going be hard to go from [charging] $25,000 a semester to charging zero dollars a semester,” he said.

'Gig economy' offers new workforce world

A few years ago, former Madison County teacher Charissa Goerge was making as much money selling her handmade dresses on Etsy as she was as a teacher.
“And not only was I teaching, I was cross-country coach, track coach, teacher and doing this full time,” Goerge said. “It just got to be too much, so I decided to, as my boyfriend says, retire early.”

She left her teaching job that year and started selling her dresses full time from her home in Louisa County through her Etsy shop.

Goerge is one of the 24 percent of American adults who have participated in the “gig economy,” or selling goods or services through an online platform, according to a recent Pew Research Center survey.

No recent government data exist for this type of employment, as the Bureau of Labor Statistics has not had the funding to complete a survey designed to measure “contingent and alternative work” since 2005.

There are many options for people to get involved in the gig economy. They can drive for ridesharing apps like Uber and Lyft or open a shop on Etsy to sell their crafts or vintage items.

Others, like TaskRabbit, allow people to complete odd jobs for others. Moonlighting, which is a similar app, is based locally in Charlottesville.

According to the Pew study, 8 percent of Americans have earned money in the last year using digital platforms to take on a job or task, 18 percent of Americans have earned money in the last year by selling something online and 1 percent have rented out their properties on a home-sharing site.

The study said that there are a variety of experiences by workers, including those who use it to “pass the time” where the income is not essential and those who rely on the income they earn and use these platforms to fit around other demands.

In addition to the increase in gig work, state and national officials say the nation is seeing an increase in people working more part-time jobs and a decline in traditional single-employer, long-term work.

That change in work pattern means many Americans will be without access to traditional benefits and workplace protections.

“If a third of the workforce today is in some form of contingent [work], sometimes that might just be two part-time jobs, and the expectations are that that number may rise to 50 percent within the next 20 years,” said U.S. Sen. Mark R. Warner, D-Va. “You’re going to have half of America without any social insurance.”

For Goerge, using the Etsy site was an easy decision. She tried to sell her dresses on other sites but never made a single sale. She didn’t have to worry about driving internet traffic to her own, newly established website. There was too much overhead and cost in opening a physical location, and Etsy granted her more flexibility if she wanted to travel or work different hours on a specific day.

“I’ve definitely been much happier since I’ve been on my own schedule working from home versus teaching,” she said. “Not that teaching is a bad thing, because it’s not. It’s a great thing, but ... I work better if I go to bed at midnight and get up at 8 than if I go to bed at 10 and get up at 6.”

Goerge’s shop is called toFREEyourSTYLE and she specializes in convertible infinity dresses. A challenge has been the ever-increasing number of similar style dresses at a cheaper price. Her dresses start at $120, and she’s seen similar styles for $40.

“Me being 5-foot-11, I know how hard it is to find things that are actually long enough. So if you’re buying something from China and they have a one-size-fits-all, it’s going to be way too short for somebody that’s taller,” she said. “Craftsmanship is a big thing for me.”

Her dresses typically take four to 10 weeks to make, but she also does rush orders. She never puts her shop in vacation mode because that would take her shop out of the Etsy search option, and she doesn’t mind responding to emails when she’s gone, she said.

“It’s there, they can find it, they can ask me any questions,” she said. “Normally, I reply within 24 hours or less. I tend to be a little long-winded in my replies because I want to make sure they have all the information that they would need.”

For Uber driver Orlando Solis, flexibility also was an important factor in why he chose to drive for the rideshare company full time.

“I was a stay-at-home dad for a while and trying to find something to earn some income while still having the flexibility of being able to pick my son up from school or anything like that if I needed to, once he started school,” he said. “Other than starting your own business and putting all that capital and everything into that, Uber seemed like an excellent option, so I just went ahead and went with it.”

Solis has been driving for Uber for a little over a year and started when he lived in North Carolina. Initially, it took a couple weeks for him to be approved, and then four or five days for the new requirements once he moved to Charlottesville.

Surprisingly, he said, he hasn’t had any terrible experiences.

“There was an incident with throw-up, and when something like that happens, the rest of your night is done,” he said. “If it happens at 10 at night and I was planning on staying out until about 2 a.m. or 3 a.m., all that time is gone. But Uber is very good about helping out with that situation and making sure you get compensated for time and cleanup.”
He said he likes that he can get his earnings the same day, which can help if unexpected expenses pop up.

“The income’s decent. Especially when the students are in town, it’s good,” he said. “When they’re out of town, it’s kind of hard to get by.”
Warner has met with gig-economy and independent contract workers in Charlottesville and across the state to see what can be done to help these workers in terms of government policy.

“I think we need to create a system of portable benefits,” Warner said. “The idea that somebody’s going to work for the same firm for 20 years is more and more going to become the exception.”

Warner cited a 2015 Federal Reserve report on the economic wellbeing of American households, where 46 percent of adults say they either could not cover an emergency expense costing $400 or would cover it by selling something or borrowing money. He said that that leads to economic uncertainty among many, even those who are employed full time.
He said the federal government is going to need to try experimenting with what type of legislation might work to assist in providing a fallback for gig and contingent workers that they may not have on their own.

One “experiment” playing out right now, he said, is with Uber in New York City.
The Machinists Union entered negotiations with Uber and created the Independent Driver Guild in May 2016. The IDG is “fighting to enhance the earning ability of all drivers while affording independent contractors traditional benefits and protections not currently available between Uber and working drivers,” according to their website.

While the estimated number of people in these types of electronic platform “gig” jobs ranges depending on what study someone is reading, there are still many independent contract workers in the country, Warner said.

“But what’s not disputed is that we now have a third of the American workers who are not working in long-term, traditional employment and they don’t have access to the social contract that was created in the 1930s and ’40s, so they’re operating without any net underneath them,” he said.

Both Goerge and Solis have health insurance — Goerge through the Affordable Care Act and Solis through his wife’s employment.

Solis said he disagrees with the lawsuits that some drivers have filed to fight for different and increased forms of other compensation.

“When you read and sign the contract … right up front, they say they’re not doing any of that,” he said. “I kind of like it the way it is now.”

Goerge said the subsidies with the ACA make it affordable for her, and she says she isn’t saving for retirement yet.

“If it gets to a point where I can’t make ends meet, I can always go and fall back on teaching,” she said. “I have my degree — my degree isn’t going anywhere.”

Instacart brings mobile app grocery delivery to Charlottesville

A delivery service that made its roots in San Francisco has now expanded into Virginia and — as of this month, Charlottesville — and promises to be yet another facet of the escalating grocery store turf war simmering across the city and Albemarle County.

On Aug. 8, Instacart launched its grocery delivery service in the greater Charlottesville area, offering 46,000 households same day delivery from any of its partner stores, which currently consist of Wegmans, Giant, Costco, CVS, Petco and Whole Foods Market.

The concept is simple: customers go online to Instacart’s website — or install and use the Instacart app on their smartphone — pick out their groceries and set a delivery time. Not unlike an Uber driver, a “shopper” receives the order, retrieves the selected groceries and delivers them to the customer’s door with a $6 fee tacked on.

Grocery delivery services are not new to Charlottesville. Relay Foods operated a grocery warehouse in the city until January following a merger with Door to Door Organics, which led to 48 Charlottesville employees being laid off.

Door to Door still delivers to Charlottesville through its Pennsylvania warehouse, but therein lies Instacart’s distinction from traditional delivery services. Where Door to Door relies on pulling products into their warehouse and shipping them out, Instacart cuts out the overhead, putting no direct management or distribution network between the customer and the delivery.

According to Joyce Oh, operations manager for Instacart, the new model also translates to a more personable customer experience.

“Our shoppers have the ability to call and text their customers, make replacements for them and get to know them on a much deeper level than the typical warehouse model,” said Oh. “That’s simply because, hey, we are thinking of ourselves as customers, and if we are shopping for groceries — one of your most personal expenses week to week — how can we make that the best experience for you.”

On top of the new options it creates for consumers, Instacart is also a job creator, at least in the same sense as apps like Uber and Lyft. It relies on independent contractors to perform the work on the ground, conducted entirely through an app and without a direct supervisor.

“It’s gig economy,” Oh said. “Very flexible; people pick up their own hours as it fits into their schedule.”

It’s the kind of gig often aimed at university students, with which the University of Virginia is replete. Deliveries are paid out on a commission basis, with a per-item and per-order commission, along with an optional tip from the customer. Prospective deliverers need only a mode of transportation and a smartphone to run the app.

The service launched on the West Coast in 2012 as a startup from former Amazon employee Apoorva Mehta, who serves now as the CEO. Now valued at $3.4 billion, the company expanded quickly across the U.S., first coming to major markets like New York and Washington, D.C., before trickling down to smaller cities and communities.

In the state, Instacart has already come to Richmond and Virginia Beach, which were fast adopters — “Virginians are very tech savvy,” Oh said. That has led the company to Charlottesville, which has shown “incredible demand,” according to Instacart senior regional director David Schloss.

That supposed demand was tracked by the company’s website, which prompts new users to input their zip code to see if Instacart services their area.

“We track how many times customers are searching for our service in their zip code and it’s not serviced,” said Oh. “We saw in Charlottesville there was an uptick in demand; a lot of people were trying to get groceries delivered to their zip code.”

They’re now hoping to meet that demand, which has only continued to grow, according to a spokesperson for Door to Door Organics. The company has long-existed in the same markets as Instacart; the company's spokesperson said that in those markets, merely having an increased awareness for grocery delivery services has been beneficial to each.

Instacart’s availability does open up new channels of revenue for several area retailers that are competing in the city’s already-crowded field of grocery stores. Although a relative newcomer to the area, Wegmans is among Instacart’s strongest partnerships and has been advertising the new service since its launch.

“We know our customers are busy, and that any found time in their week can make a difference,” Heather Pawlowski, vice president of e-commerce for Wegmans, said in a news release. “We’re excited to launch delivery from our local stores in partnership with Instacart as they move into the Charlottesville market. Together, we’re able to provide our customers with a seamless shopping experience with the quality and service they’ve come to expect from Wegmans, without leaving their house.”

Giant, Costco, CVS and Petco have similar partnerships, as does Whole Foods Market, although Amazon’s recent acquisition of Whole Foods may not bode well for Instacart, given Amazon’s own foray into grocery delivery with its subsidiary, Amazon Fresh.

Oh said other major grocery retailers are not off the table as potential future partners, although no specifics have yet been released.

Governor promises Va. will be No. 1 place to do business

Gov. Ralph Northam, who was inaugurated as Virginia’s 73rd governor in January, wasted little time in marking his first appearance in the Charlottesville area Tuesday.

Addressing a luncheon at the Boar's Head Resort hosted by the Charlottesville Regional Chamber of Commerce, he was quick to express regrets over a few recent events: the Aug. 12 unrest, the failure to pass a state budget and his March Madness bracket, which had No. 1-ranked Virginia and Virginia Tech facing off in the NCAA men’s basketball championship game.

He vowed, however, to make Virginia rank first in a different way: “If I have anything to do with it, we’ll get back to being the No. 1 place to do business,” Northam said.

Under his predecessor, Terry McAuliffe, Virginia climbed from 13th place in CNBC’s 2016 Best States for Business to sixth in the 2017 rankings. Virginia was the top-ranked state in 2007, 2009 and 2011.

Northam ticked off the challenges he sees for the commonwealth and its business environment, including the need to diversify our regional economies; create more opportunity in rural communities, where unemployment is higher than the statewide 3.5 percent rate; commit to dedicated funding for the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority; and reform state taxes and regulatory structures.

The Democratic governor tied most of these problems to two solutions — well-funded schools at all levels and Medicaid expansion, arguing the federal Medicaid funding would allow more state money to be spent in other areas.

“We need to diversify our economy by understanding what the jobs of the 21st century are,” Northam said, citing biotechnology, data collection and data analysis.
Gov. Northam speaks at Charlottesville Regional Chamber Luncheon

“We do that through having excellent colleges and universities that are affordable to all Virginians, but also through supporting and marketing community colleges,” he said. “There are thousands of good, high-paying jobs that don’t require a four-year education.”
Northam drew applause by calling for “less emphasis on multiple-choice tests” and instead helping children “start thinking creatively.”

Due to a disagreement over Medicaid expansion, the Republican-controlled General Assembly adjourned earlier this month without passing a budget. The House of Delegates’ version of the budget included $421 million to provide Medicaid coverage for 400,000 more Virginians, but the Senate refused to expand the program.

The House’s budget in turn relies on hundreds of millions in state savings made possible by almost $3 billion in federal Medicaid funding.

“That’s money that could be spent for community colleges, K-12 education, raises for state employees, raises for law enforcement and assistance with the opioid crisis,” Northam said, asserting that Virginia’s rejection of federal Medicaid funds is the equivalent of giving other states more than $5 million a day.

“If you were to say it’s a good idea to give your competitors $5 million a day, I would tell you — as a neurologist — that you need to get your head examined,” he said. “Whether you like the Affordable Care Act or not, it is the law of the land right now, and we are sending our money to Washington every year to support it. All we’re trying to do is bring those resources back.”

Northam has called for a special budget session to convene on April 11; lawmakers must pass a budget by June 30 to avoid a potential government shutdown.

While warming up the crowd for the governor, House Minority Leader David J. Toscano, D-Charlottesville, poked fun at the legislature’s failure to pass budget legislation. “We did pass a new state salamander,” he said. “We’re going to allow dogs to come into wineries — that’s important. And we’re going to allow cakes to have liqueur in them.”
After the event in Albemarle County, Toscano echoed Northam’s wide-angle definition of a business-friendly climate.

“Everything plays a role in creating the best state to do business,” he said. “It’s infrastructure, it’s the roads, it’s Metro, it’s the ports, it’s the airports. But then there’s the educational system — K-12, community college and higher education. All of this fits together. You can’t just emphasize one and hope that you’re going to get the result you need, which is a better business climate.”